## 5.2 Convex Functions
### Extended-valued functions
To model inadmissible points: work with *extended-valued functions* $F: \mathbb R^N \to (-\infty, \infty]$. Define $F(x) = \infty$ at non-admissible points $x$: none of these points will ever be a minimizer.

This extension of a function $F: K \to \mathbb R$ to the domain of all of $\mathbb R^N$ is called *canonical extension*.

The domain of an extended-valued function $F$ is defined as $\text{dom}(F) = \{x \in \mathbb R^N : F(x) \neq -\infty\}$. A function with non-empty domain is called *proper*.

### Convex functions
> **Definition 15.1** (*Convex function*)
> An extended-valued function $F$ is called
> - *convex* if for all $x, z$ and $t$, $$F(tx + (1-t)z) \leq tF(x) + (1-t)F(z)$$
> - *strictly convex* if above inequality holds strictly for $x \neq z, t \in (0, 1)$
> - *strongly convex* with parameter $\gamma > 0$ if for all $x, z$ and $t$, $$F(tx + (1-t)z) \leq tF(x) + (1-t)F(z) - \tfrac{\gamma}{2} t (1-t) ||x-z||_2^2$$
> $F$ is called (strictly; strongly) concave if $-F$ is (strictly; strongly) convex.
> A function $F: K \to \mathbb R$ on a convex subset $K \subseteq \mathbb R^N$ is called convex if its canonical extension is convex.

Strongly convex functions are always strictly convex, and strictly convex functions are always convex. Convex functions always have convex domains.

$F$ is convex if and only if its *epigraph* $\text{epi}(F) = \{(x, r) \mid r \geq F(x)\}$ is a convex set.

##### Smooth convex functions
If $F$ is differentiable, its convexity can further be characterized as follows:

> **Proposition 15.2** (*Smooth convex functions*)
> Let $F: \mathbb R^N \to \mathbb R$ be differentiable.
> 1. $F$ is convex iff for all $x, y$: $$F(x) \geq F(y) + \langle \nabla F(y), x-y \rangle$$, where $\nabla F(y) = (\partial_{y_1}F(y),\dots,\partial_{y_n}F(y))^\top$
> 2. $F$ is strongly convex with $\gamma > 0$ if for all $x, y$, $$F(x) \geq F(y) + \langle \nabla F(y), x-y \rangle + \frac{\gamma}{2}(t)(1-t)||x-z||_2^2$$
> 3. If $F$ is twice differentiable, then $F$ is convex iff for all $x$,$$\nabla^2 F(x) \succcurlyeq 0$$ where $\nabla^2 F$ is the Hessian of $F$

##### Composition of Convex functions
> **Proposition 15.3** (*Compositions of convex functions*)
> 1. If $F, G$ are convex functions on $\mathbb R^N$, then for all $\alpha, \beta \geq 0$, $\alpha F + \beta G$ is convex.
> 2. Let $F$ be convex and non-decreasing, let $G$ be convex. Then $H(x) = F(G(X))$ is convex.

##### Examples of convex functions
- norms $||\cdot||$ on $\mathbb R^N$ are always convex, by the triangle inequality and homogenity
- the $\ell_p$-norms are strictly convex for $p \in (1, \infty)$, and *not* strictly convex for $p \in \{1, \infty\}$
- if $A \in \mathbb R^{N \times N}$ is positive semi-definite, the function $F(x) = x^\top Ax$ is convex. If $A$ is positive definite, $F$ is strictly convex.
- For a convex set $K$, the characteristic function $\chi_K(x) = 0$ if $x \in K$ and $\infty$ otherwise is convex (watch out, this is defined in a different way than usual!) ^d5bfc2

%% #Lecture 17, 11.07. [[Foundations Section 5.2 printout.pdf]] %%

##### Convexity and continuity
> **Proposition 15.4**
> Convex functions $F: \mathbb R^N \to \mathbb R$ (which are **not** extended-valued functions) are continuous.

For extended-valued functions, one uses *lower semi-continuity*:

> **Definition 15.5** (*Lower semicontinuity*)
> An [[#Extended-valued functions|extended-valued function]] $F$ is *lower semicontinuous* if for all $x$ and every sequence $x_j \to x$, it holds that $$\lim\inf_{j} F(x_j) \geq F(x)$$
> A function is lower semicontinuous iff its epigraph is closed.

Examples:
- continuous functions are lower semicontinuous.
- $\chi_K$ ([[#^d5bfc2|definition]]) is not continuous, but lower semicontinuous iff $K$ is closed
	- $K$ closed, $x$ in $K$: for a sequence $(x_j)_j$ converging to $x$ from inside $K$, $\lim\inf F(x_j) = 0 = F(x)$ and from outside, $\lim\inf F(x_j) = \infty \geq 0 = F(x)$.
	- $K$ non-closed, $x \notin K$ that is a limit point: Find sequence $x_j \to x$ inside $K$, then $\lim\inf F(x_j) = 0 < \infty = F(x)$.

Lower semicontinuity is particularly useful in *infinite-dimensional* Hilbert spaces (e.g. $||\cdot||$ can be non-continuous wrt. the weak topology, but still lower semicontinuous).

### Minimizing convex functions
> **Proposition 15.6**
> Let $F$ be a convex extended-valued function. Then:
> 1. Every local minimum of $F$ is a global minimum.
> 2. The set of minima of $F$ is a convex set.
> 3. If $F$ is strictly convex, the minimum is unique.

^f3aef6

###### #Proof of [[#^f3aef6|Proposition 15.6]]
Statement 1:
Let $x$ be a local minimum and assume for some $z$, $F(z) < F(x)$. Then for all $t \in (0, 1)$, $F(xt + z(1-t)) \leq t F(x) + (1-t) F(z) < F(x)$. In particular, in every local neighborhood of $x$ there is a point $y$ with lower function value $F(y) < F(x)$, a contradiction.

Statement 2:
Let $F(x) = F(y)$, where $x, y$ are two (local and global) minima of $F$. Then $F(tx + (1-t)y) \leq tF(x) + (1-t)F(y) = t F(x) + (1-t) F(x) = F(x)$. Hence every point on the line between $x, y$ is also a minimizer.

Statement 3:
Suppose $x \neq y$ are both minima. Then by strict convexity, $F(xt + (1-t)y) < t F(x) + (1-t) F(y) = F(x)$, i.e. every convex combination has a *strictly smaller* function value than the minima, a contradiction.


### Jointly convex functions
A function $f(x, y)$ of *two arguments* $x \in \mathbb R^n$, $y \in \mathbb R^m$ is *jointly convex* if it is convex as a function of the variable $z = (x,y)$. #TODO What is the purpose of this definition? I think it is mostly "syntactic sugar", since it is equivalent to talking about convexity of the corresponding function $f: \mathbb R^{n+m} \to \mathbb R$.

Example: $f(x, y) = xy$ is "marginally" (or elelement-wise) convex, but not jointly convex. (I think because it is not convex in the "direction" (1, -1)). See [here](https://www.researchgate.net/figure/A-marginally-convex-function-is-not-necessarily-jointly-convex-The-function-f-x-y_fig2_339504312).

> **Theorem 15.7**
> Let $f$ be an extended-valued, *jointly convex* function. Then the function $g(x) = \inf_{y \in \mathbb R^m} f(x, y)$, $x \in \mathbb R^n$, is convex.

^e2d3b3

###### #Proof of [[#^e2d3b3|Theorem 15.7]]
For $t \in [0, 1]$, by joint convexity, $$g(tx_1 + (1-t)x_2) \leq f(tx_1 + (1-t)x_2, t y_1 + (1-t)y_2)$$$$\leq t f(x_1, y_1) + (1-t) f(x_2, y_2) = t g(x_1) + (1-t) g(x_2)$$
which is the claim.

### *Maxima* of convex function
We can also say something about *maxima* on *compact convex sets*:

> **Theorem 15.8**
> Let $K \subseteq \mathbb R^N$ be compact and convex, and $F: K \to \mathbb R$ be a convex function. Then $F$ attains its maximum at an *[[5.1 Convexity - Convex Sets#Extreme Points|extreme point]]* of $K$.

^86df37

###### #Proof of [[#^86df37|Theorem 15.8]]
Let $x \in K$ be a maximum in $K$. Since $K$ is the convex hull of its extreme points, we can write $x = \sum_j^m t_i x_i$ for some $m$ and some (*not necessarily all!*) extreme points $x_j$. Then

$$F(x) = \sum_j t_j F(x_j) \leq \sum_j t_j F(x) = F(x)$$
and therefore, $F(x_j) = F(x)$ for all of the points $x_j$.