## 5.4 The Subdifferential
The *subdifferential* is a generalization of the gradient to non-differentiable functions. Idea: the subdifferential is *set-valued*, as there are multiple "potential" derivatives at non-differentiable points.

> **Definition 16.5** (*Subdifferential*)
> Let $F: \mathbb R^N \to \mathbb R$ be convex. The subdifferential of $F$ at $x$ is the *set*
> $$\partial F(x) = \{ v \in \mathbb R^N: F(z) - F(x) \geq \langle v, z-x\rangle ~~\forall z \in \mathbb R^N \}$$
> The elements of $\partial F(x)$ are called *subgradients* of $F$ at $x$. If the gradient exists, $\partial F(x) = \{ \nabla F(x) \}$.

##### Example: Subdifferential of $|x|$
We have $\partial F(x) = \{ \text{sign}(x) \}$ for points $x \neq 0$, and $\partial F(0) = [-1, 1]$ (the whole interval!).

This is because for $v \in [-1, 1]$, $vz \leq |vz| \leq |z|$ and for $v \notin [-1, 1]$, choose $z = v$ and $zv = v^2 = |v|^2 > |v|$ as $|v| > 1$.

#Question: Could we take the set of all limits $\left\{ \lim_{n \to \infty} \tfrac{f(y_n) - f(x)}{||x-y_n||} \mid y_n \to x, y_n \neq x \right\}$ and obtain a subset of the subdifferential? As for example for the absoute value function, this set is $\{-1, 1\} \subsetneq [-1, 1]$? Maybe even the subdifferential is the convex hull of this set?

### Subdifferentials and Minima
%% #Lecture 18, 12.07. [[Foundations Section 5.3 and 5.4 printout.pdf]] [[Foundations Section 5.5 (part I) printout.pdf]] %%

> **Theorem 16.7** (*Subdifferentials and Minima*)
> A vector $x$ is a minimum of $F$ *if and only if* $0 \in \partial F(x)$.

^c2b113

###### #Proof of [[#^c2b113|Theorem 16.7]]
One-liner: 0 is in the subdifferential iff $F(z) - F(x) \geq \langle 0, z-x \rangle = 0$ for all $z$. In other words, no point $z$ takes a smaller value $F(z) < F(x)$, hence $x$ is a minimum.

### Subdifferentials and Conjugation
There is a duality between subgradients of $F$ and subgradients of its [[5.3 Convexity - Convex Conjugate#5 3 The Convex Conjugate|conjugate]] $F^\ast$:

> **Theorem 16.8** (*Subdifferentials and Conjugation*)
> Let $F$ be a convex, extended-valued function and $x,  y \in \mathbb R^N$. Then the following are equivalent:
> 1. $y \in \partial F(x)$.
> 2. $F(x) + F^\ast(y) = \langle x, y \rangle$
> 3. $x \in \partial F^\ast(y)$

^3fb25a

A consequence: *If $F$ is convex and lower semicontinuous, then $\partial F$ is the "inverse" of $\partial F^\ast$ - in the sense that $x \in \partial F^\ast(y) \Leftrightarrow y \in \partial F(x)$*.

###### #Proof of [[#^3fb25a|Theorem 16.8]]
Part 1, 1 => 2:
By definition of the subgradient, condition 1 is: $$\langle x, y \rangle - F(x) \geq \langle z, y \rangle - F(z) ~~\forall z \in \mathbb R^n.$$
Therefore $z \mapsto \langle z, y \rangle - F(z)$ attains its minimum in $x$. By definition of the convex conjugate, this implies $F^\ast(y) = \langle x, y \rangle - F(x)$, i.e. condition 2.

Part 2, 2 => 1:
By a similar argument, #TODO think about this myself or look at the recording.

Part 3, 2 <=> 3:
If $F$ is lower semicont. then $F^{\ast\ast} = F$ by [[5.3 Convexity - Convex Conjugate#^ec92f9|Prop. 16.2]]. Hence 2) is equivalent to $F^{\ast\ast}(x) + F^\ast(y) = \langle x, y \rangle$. Using "1 <=> 2", let $F^\ast$ take the role of $F$, $x$ and the role of $y$ and vice-versa, and apply this already known equivalence.

### Proximal mapping
Let $F$ be a convex extended-valued function. Then for any $z$, $$x \mapsto F(x) + ||x-z||_2^2/2$$ is strictly convex, hence has a unique minimizer. This leads to the **proximal mapping** $P_F$:
$$P_F(z) = \arg\min_x \left( F(x) + ||x-z||_2^2/2 \right)$$

##### Examples of proximal mappings
- if $F = \chi_K$ for $K$ convex, then $P_K := P_{\chi_K}$ is the *orthogonal projection* onto $K$: $P_K(z) = \arg\min_{x \in K} ||x-z||_2$.
- in particular, if $K$ is a subspace of $\mathbb R^N$, $P_K$ is the usual orthogonal projection onto $K$

#### Proximal Mapping and Subdifferential
> **Proposition 16.9**
> Let $F$ be a convex extended-valued function. Then  $x = P_F(z)$ *if and only if* $z \in x + \partial F(x)$.

^867ead

By [[#^c2b113|Theorem 16.7]], $x = P_F(z)$ if and only if $0 \in \partial(||\cdot - z||_2^2/2 + F)(x)$. The function $x \mapsto ||x-z||_2^2$ is differentiable with gradient $\nabla_x (||x-z||_2^2/2) = x-z$. So the above condition reads $0 \in x-z + \partial F(x)$, or equivalently, $z \in x + \partial F(x)$.

#### Moreau's Identity
The previous proposition "justifies to write" ( #TODO what does that mean?) $P_F = (I + \partial F)^{-1}$.

> **Theorem 16.10** (*Moreau's Identity*)
> Let $F$ be a lower semicontinuous convex extended-valued function. Then for all $z$, $$P_F(z) + P_{F^\ast}(z) = z$$

^931ad9

- Consequence: $P_F$ is easy to compute iff $P_{F^\ast}$ is easy to compute.
- Applying Moreau's identity to $\tau F$, $\tau > 0$, shows that $P_{\tau F}(z) + \tau P_{\tau^{-1} F^\ast}(z/\tau) = z$.

###### #Proof of [[#^931ad9|Moreau's Identity]]
Let $x = P_F(z)$, set $y = z-x$. By [[#^867ead|Prop. 16.9]] we have $z \in x + \partial F(x)$, i.e. $y \in \partial F(x)$. Since $F$ is lower semicont. by [[#^3fb25a|Theorem 16.8]] we have that $x \in \partial F^\ast(y)$, or $z \in y + \partial F^\ast(y)$. Since in the definition of the proximal mapping, the minimizer is unique, it follows from [[#^867ead|Prop. 16.9]] that $y = P_{F^\ast}(z)$. In particular, $P_F(z) + P_{F^\ast}(z) = x + y = z$.


#### Nonexpansiveness of proximal mappings
$P_F$ *contracts* (or at least does not expand) distances between points.

> **Theorem 16.11**
> For a convex extended-valued $F$, the proximal mapping $P_F$ is a contraction:
> $$||P_F(z) - P_F(z')||_2 \leq ||z-z'||_2 ~~\forall z, z'$$

^42b24f

###### #Proof of [[#^42b24f|Theorem 16.11]]
Set $x = P_F(z)$ and $x' = P_F(z')$. By [[#^867ead|Prop. 16.9]] we have $z \in x + \partial F(x)$, so with $y = z-x$ we have $y \in \partial F(x)$. By [[#^3fb25a|Theorem 16.8]], $F(x) + F^\ast(y) = \langle x, y \rangle$. Similarly, we find $x', y'$ with $z' = x' + y'$, $F(x') + F^\ast(y') = \langle x', y' \rangle$.

Putting things together and expanding the inner products, we get that $$||z-z'||_2^2 = ||x-x'||-2^2 + ||y-y'||_2^2 + 2 \langle x-x', y-y'\rangle. \tag{$\ast$}$$
Recall the [[5.3 Convexity - Convex Conjugate#^d415ba|Fenchel-Young inequality]]:  $$\langle x, y' \leq F(x) + F^\ast(y'), ~~ \langle x', y \rangle \leq F(x') + F^\ast(y)$$
Therefore by first expanding the inner product, applying above equalities and then applying the inequalities derived from Fenchel-Young, $$\langle x-x', y-y'\rangle = F(x') + F^\ast(y') + F(x) + F^\ast(y) - \langle x', y \rangle - \langle x, y' \rangle \geq 0.$$
Together with $(\ast)$, this shows $||x-x'||_2^2 \leq ||z-z'||_2^2$.

%% Watched until 1:39:00 in the recording. #TODO watch the remaining 4min. %%